# EMGHeadphones
Wearable Technology has taken up the market for many years now and has become very 
popular. People worldwide are using some smart wearable devices like a fitness band, watch, 
smart glasses, earphones, and others for continuous vital sign monitoring, sleep monitoring, 
and various other parameters. Increasing lifestyle and mental disorders adding to the risk of 
physiological and psychological extremities has made it very important to monitor both physical 
and mental parameters continuously. Headphones have been used amongst young adults and 
are used on a daily basis for an average of almost 7.8 hours per week. Given its frequent and 
prolonged use vital sign monitoring and emotional recognition integrated into headphones 
provides us with a unique opportunity for unobtrusive data collection and analysis. Since 
today’s youth is continuously under some sort of stress and statistics say atleast 20 per cent 
of young people are likely to experience some form of mental illness - such as depression, 
mood disturbances, substance abuse, suicidal behaviours, eating disorders and others. Also 
sudden cardiac arrest is the leading cause of death in young athletes. Estimates vary, but 
some reports suggest that about 1 in 50,000 to 1 in 80,000 young athletes die of sudden 
cardiac death each year. Continuous monitoring of vital signs can help identify a patient’s risk 
for stroke, heart attack, heart failure, arterial aneurysm, and renal failure. This suggests that 
vital sign monitoring and emotional recognition for monitoring both physical and mental wellbeing will be essentially helpful. Many sensors like Electromyography and 
Photoplethysmography are used for checking emotional well-being and vital sign monitoring. 
Facial electromyography (fEMG) refers to an electromyography (EMG) technique that 
measures muscle activity by detecting and amplifying the tiny electrical impulses that are 
generated by muscle fibers when they contract.
It primarily focuses on two major muscle groups in the face, 
1. The corrugator supercilia group which is associated with frowning.
2. The zygomaticus major muscle group which is associated with smiling.
